Max Kuhn, tidymodels
Max Kuhn, tidyimodels
And now I'm going to switch to English
because our next speaker speaks English
so I'm going to switch
The next
keynote will be
Max Kuhn. He works as a software engineer
at Post-it. He leads the
tidymodels team. And on
2020, when we were
supposedly
organizing the event here
we decided to invite him
but the pandemic and stuff so we have
to
postpone the invitation
and at that moment when we decided
to invite Max, we looked
at our list of cool people that do awesome
things and he was there so
let's invite Max. And on 2023
when we were absolutely
sure that we were going to hold the event here
we invited him again
so let's come to Montevideo
and he didn't answer our email
so we moved him from the
cool people list to the black list
for a couple of weeks
until we discovered that he actually answered
our email but it went to the spam folder
and we solved the issue and now
Max is here to talk about the tidymodels
universe
so thank you Max for coming
You can hear me okay?
Excellent. Thanks for sticking
around to the end of the conference
I appreciate it. Now I've been
using, you may have noticed this, we've been using
Google Translate during
the sessions and I've realized
if you're going to do that and translate it to Spanish
or Portuguese, I will speak
try to speak slowly and clearly
I'm saying
this because, let's see, my favorites
so far have been
so I wrote a package called Carrot
and has anybody in the US
if somebody calls you a Karen
has anybody ever heard that before?
It's kind of like a really mean thing to say
and it translated
Max Kuhn's Karen package
so that was that and then
ggplot got translated to
was it like
jpplop2
yeah
so that's what we're going to call it from now on
we're going to send it to Cray and break all your dependencies
it's a new name
so I'm here to talk about tidymodels
we did a tutorial on this
hopefully it won't be too bad if you were there
and hopefully it will be good for people who weren't
so if you want the slides
it's at the bottom of the slides
there's a little bigger font here if you want to see it
my github handle is topepo
so it's 2023 Latin R
so at first I'm going to tell you
why maybe tidymodels and actually
Carrot too exist
R is very very very good at
many types of modeling
it's always been stellar at things like
mixed models and hierarchical models
survival analysis
and there are just so many things that it does
in terms of modeling
for a long time it's had quite a long
history of having really good predictive modeling
and machine learning models
so there's a lot of really good things if you're doing
modeling in R
you know the formula interface if you ever use that
like y tilde x
that's been around since I think it was like 1982
believe it or not in the S language
and so all the things they did
back then in the S language have really carried through
R and so we've always
benefited from having really expressive ways
to do modeling
and it's also pretty much had cutting edge models
so things like random forest the first
real implementation of that that people could
use that wasn't Fortran was
built in R and so a lot of times
people who do modeling they might use
R as their first sort of like
prototyping language
so outside of like deep learning and some
other things especially as tree based
models and regularized models
I think you see things in R before you see them
anywhere else and if they're not there
the last really good thing that's pointed out here
is R and the S language
originally was built as an interface
to Fortran wrappers if you can believe that
so for quite a while in the
DNA of R and S
it's always been really easy to take
things that R doesn't do well
and do them much faster or better
in C or Java or Python
or whatever it is and so
there's quite a lot there to love
and use and
it can be very effective with it
but there is a downside and it's mostly
about consistency and so
you know some examples
that I'll go into a little bit more
detail
come down to things where I think package
managers and I'll include myself in
here early on
I think when we write packages we
kind of write them for ourselves usually
and so a lot of times
the scope of the package or the
things it can do or the things that it doesn't do
a lot of times it's largely informed
by the things that are important to us at the
moment right so
who we work with
you know one said you know I really
wanted to eventually write a package that I love
that nobody knows about right
and so what happens sometimes is somebody writes an interesting
modeling package but there's a lot of things
that other people might want to do that maybe
they don't know about or haven't thought about and it doesn't
really get implemented in the package and that can
make it kind of difficult to use sometimes
so just some examples
of the consistency problem
let's say you're fitting a classification
model and let's say you have like
two classes like yes or no and
you want to get the class probabilities back
you might start off by fitting like
an old school like linear discriminant model
and the standard way of doing
that is to take that model fit and put it into the
predict function and if you use that
particular model and you want to get the probabilities
back you don't really have to do anything you can
just use the predict function
and give it your object but for a lot
of other models you have to say something like type
equal and this is just
this slide is usually a lot longer
with all the options
you have but you know there's type equal response
for logistic regression there's
sometimes it's prob which is the one I like
sometimes it's posterior
sometimes it's probability so
you know when I was doing this for a living like
in before
2000 I'm old
you know this is very very frustrating because you
have to remember all the minutiae of every
particular package that you would like to try
and that was kind of a pain
the other thing is R
generally has two interfaces
the models there's the formula method
that I discussed and then there's also
what we just really call like the non formula method
and that's where you have
predictors in some matrix or data frame
x in your outcome in some
vector or matrix or whatever y
and then you'd say the function
and give it x and y
and sometimes you want one
or the other or sometimes you might want
both depending on how your data come in
and things like that and so here are five
fairly popular machine
learning or modeling
packages and
let's pick glimnet
so between the formula method
and the non formula method raise your hand
if you think it has the formula method
okay thank you raise your hand
if you think it has the non formula method
okay wow
okay one versus three thank you
Hannah well here's how this
all shakes out so if you're using glimnet
it actually only takes matrices
which is kind of a pain because if you have
any categorical predictors
it's your job to turn that into
indicator variables if you want to transform
a variable that's your problem
the formula method kind of does that
automatically for you and then you have to
when you make new predictions give it
a matrix and it's very limiting
so if your data is not just
a bunch of numbers already that
you know you do the work
so you know we get around that but
it is what it is
rangers are really good random forest package
it's pretty fast and it does a lot of
things and it has both the formula method and the
non formula method which actually is not correct
you can use the formula or use
x and y the problem is
it's all in one function so they have a function
that have arguments formula and data
and x and y
which is kind of weird but we can get there
our part is
a decision tree package
very old it has just the formula method
I long ago
put in an issue to get the non formula package
or non formula interface
and the maintainer sent me
the sources and says you should maintain it
then I am not maintaining
it and then survival
is for survival package
it is also formula only and then
XGBoost which a lot of people love
not only does it not have
a formula method you have to convert the
data to a special sparse matrix format
you append
your outcome to that
and if it is a classification model
you have to convert your outcome to zero based integers
so this just gives you a sense
that these are all used quite a bit
all these packages
so sometimes you are doing a lot of work
for these packages
so this isn't really something that we
like people to deal with
so I used to work with
engineers a lot and some of the
sharpest and most functional engineers I worked with
were called systems engineers
so like you think about your phone
and there is a whole engineering crew at Apple
or the people that make Android phones
that are battery engineers right
and they have engineers that work on the screen to optimize that
and the antenna and they have all these groups
of engineers and what a systems engineer does
is make sure all that stuff works together
that one thing is not taking too much
power so the other thing can't
work and so on. They just make it all happen
not at the end but along the way
and I feel like I realized maybe like a week
or two ago that my professional
life mostly has been spent
as what I would think of as a systems statistician
because we have a lot of packages that do
really interesting things and we want to use them
but they are not necessarily made to be consumed
to be used somewhere else
or in a different context than the
original author intended
so that is a lot of what we do
that is a lot of what I've been doing
and that is absolutely the goal of tiny models
so our job is to
really make our less frustrating
but really
it's really not that bad
it's very functional and with a few
extra tools you can get very very far
and build very effective models
and I stay here like
we usually talk about predictive models and machine learning
tiny models
can do pretty much everything
we have packages for hierarchical models
now survival models
and so on
so it's not just like a machine learning
library
so you've probably heard of the
tidyverse, I know that's kind of a ridiculous thing to say
but I've done this presentation where people
looked at me funny
and the tidyverse is built to have packages
that work really well together
to have a common sort of design goal
the naming is very similar
and it's very very thought out in how you
interface with the software
and anything else I've ever seen
and when Hadley first started working on that
he had these goals
that are listed here
don't make a new data structure that somebody has to learn
try to stick with data frames if you can
probably the most important
one here is design for humans
can anybody, raise your hand
if you know the function name
if you have a matrix and you want to
invert it, does anybody know what the function name is?
you first
solve
there's no inverse function
that's not designing for humans
so
it's those kind of things, we want to make things obvious
for you, we don't want you to get
a result back and be surprised
wait, why is it in a list and not in a data frame
that kind of thing, so when we think
about designing for humans in terms of
modeling, it's a little bit different from what they do
in the tidyverse
but at the end of the day
we want you to enjoy programming
and not be constantly frustrated by it
so
in some of the things that we do is we try to name
things and optimize them for auto
complete, so if you're doing model
tuning, all of our function names
that do that start with tune underbar
and then if you're in RStudio or VSCode
you can just tab and then you get the whole
list of things, whether they're
grids or tune objects or
things you can extract, like we try
to make function names as consistent as possible
Hannah
and when I don't
they fix it
so the other idea is this notion
of tidy data
there's a link here to when I
have these papers that really every
variable should be in a column, every row
or every observation
forms a row, that's a little bit weird for us sometimes
because sometimes we have
records that
have multiple sub-records
so if you're a patient
in a clinical trial or you're being followed longitudinally
the patient is really
the observation, they're like the independent
experimental unit and they might have
multiple rows in the data set
so some of this we have to deal with a little bit
but our
idea is we want to create
modeling packages that work well together
that do a lot of things and that
you know when you start using them, even if
you haven't used the other parts of it, you'll
already know what to expect when you get there
so I've been thinking about
modeling for a long time and if you
look at the tutorial
I mentioned that in
the process of having a career doing
modeling before coming to our
deposit
you can edit that out, right?
There were mistakes were made
you learn a lot along the way
and so a lot of that informs how we
design our software
so the first bullet point there
is type equal prop, that's
just remember that one, right? So when you use
our code we'll make the translation for you
for whether it's probability
or posterior or whatever
if you want to use the form method or not the form method
we'll handle that for you so we don't want you to have
to worry about that. Another
thing that's important to me over the year
is resampling and empirical validation
that when you have
a model and you want to know
if you want to get something out of it you should be able to
quantify its performance
hopefully using something like cross-validation
of the bootstrap. I've sat in a lot
of presentations where people present
results with logistic regression
and how important it is that this
p-value is for the interaction
is less than .05 and then
you ask what the accuracy of the model is and it's like
60% and you're like, okay
so there's a lot more to
qualifying and validating
your model beyond just doing predictive modeling
Another thing that we
do in tiny models is
it's designed with some hidden guardrails
at least in machine learning a lot of the problems
that occur that you don't necessarily know
happen until you get new data
those are the result of people using maybe the wrong
data at the wrong time for the wrong thing
or using it for multiple things
and so we
sort of, you sort of have to go out of
your way in tiny models to sort of use the
data inappropriately by accident
and so we want
people to also be able to use the infrastructure
to make your own packages pretty easily
and we want to encourage people to do things
that they necessarily couldn't
because I've heard a lot of people say
yeah, that is probably a better way to do this
but I don't know how to use that software
or I don't have a license for that or
it's not been written and I'm probably not going to
write it. So we want to also sort of
like the next slide has the phrase
leveling up. Does everyone know what that means?
It means like how can I improve me
or my tool set to get
more out of what I'm doing
and just some examples of that is
a lot of times we have variables
like predictors in our data and
we use a model that can't handle them
as character data, you know, because they're categories
and so we have to convert them
to indicator variables
there are a lot of different ways you can do that
and a lot of times there haven't been
there have been methodologies
out there that people just didn't have available
to them or the package wasn't easy
to use and so on. So
just as examples, there are things
called effect encoding methods that can be
very effective in certain situations
feature hashing is an excellent
tool if you have like
categories that have maybe
like thousands or millions of levels
and things like that. Also
multiple choice predictors. I've had
codes laying around in scripts for years
that take, you know, if I had a
model and a predictor was like what languages
do you speak, you know, some person
might have one, somebody might have four
and so having like a way
to deal with multiple categories is
really helpful. So we're trying to institutionalize
as much of that as we can in tiny models
so you can just use it and not have to
carry around your little bits
that you've been doing.
I had these slides already written before I saw
Di's presentation but
also some modern dimension
reduction methods like
UMAP which he showed and
these fancy name things
like manifold based multi-dimensional
scaling and things like that. So, you know
there are things we see in papers and all that
but we don't necessarily have the tools
to fit them and so we want you to try to
use them. Maybe they're not effective
maybe they are but having the
ability to even try that is important
to us. You know there's other
things like a lot of different imputation
tools are out there so we just want you to
be able to use this stuff.
So, you know, if there's something like yeah
I use this all the time but I can't find it anywhere
just come to our repos and put an issue we'd like
to hear from you.
Alright, so if you want to learn more besides this
there's three main resources.
There's tinymodels.org. We spent a lot
of time on that during the very beginning of the
pandemic just sort of optimizing
that putting a lot of articles in there
searchable list of functions
a lot of really nice
sequential set of getting started
articles.
Julius Hilge and I wrote
a book on tinymodels.
You can get it from O'Reilly or you can just go to
this link and take a look at it. That's
very helpful if you want longer form
documentation. And also some of you
may know after the other day
we keep all of our training materials
in the same place. We keep all
the old versions so if we change data sets you
can always get to the version that you used
but you can go to workshops.tinymodels.org
and there's a lot of training materials there.
And all this is licensed in a
way that you can use it in your classes
or for whatever you need.
Okay, so let's look at
some code maybe. Like the
tinyverse we have like a meta package.
So if you load tinymodels you see this big
amount
of output you get back. We load
things like dplyr and ggplot which are
not part of tinymodels but you're probably going to want to use
those. And also
like tinyverse we list these
conflicts. You know things
like dplyr has a filter function
but the stats package has a filter function.
If you just type filter
the one that you get is based on which
package was loaded more recently.
And so one thing that we added here
is this thing at the very bottom called
tinymodels prefer and what
that does is it has
uses the package that Hadley wrote called
conflicted that manages these
conflicts. So after running this
function assuming you want
to use dplyr and tinymodels
it will sort of default your filter
no matter how it gets loaded
to use the dplyr one.
So you don't have to use this but if you're
sort of tired of dealing with these and have the wrong
function from the wrong package
this can be a
big help for you to resolve that.
Alright
so I have some example data. It's a little bit
more than 10,000 data points
and it's something about
restaurant deliveries like food deliveries.
So basically we have
a time period from when the order was put
in to when it was delivered.
There's a few variables. There's the
order time is like the hour. You know 0 to
like 24.
There's a day of the week.
So it's a factor. It's Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday that kind of thing.
There's distance and also
there's 27 pre-made sort of
indicators and this is like the result
of like a multiple choice thing. These are
counts of the things that were ordered
so like item 3 might be somebody ordered
a nice tea or something like that.
So we want to take this information and try to predict
how long it would take you or me to get
our food at home
or wherever it's being delivered to.
So it's a fairly decent sized
data. It's 10,000 data points. There's not
that many variables.
The first thing we'll do is we'll look at the outcome.
I should say if anybody
here does survival analysis you're probably
wondering if any of this data is censored.
This is all complete data. Censored means
if I put an order in
and it's five minutes after
I don't know when it's going to get here so I don't know the
actual delivery time but I know it's at
least five minutes. And so these are all
complete values where
they've actually had the delivery and they know what the time
was. And you can see it's right skewed
which is pretty common with
time data. It's non-zero.
It ranges from maybe like
12 to
around 60. It's right skewed
with a little bit of a mode here.
So one of the things we might
think about is do we
do anything special about this?
One thing you might think about doing is logging
the outcome and then doing that.
I'm just going to keep the outcome the way it is.
And the only other thing I'm going to
do with it special
is I'm going to split the data up.
I'm going to split it into a training set,
a test set, and a validation set.
And the validation set is sort of like
a test set but you can use it along the way to
figure out how well your model is using
or how well it's working.
The test set is really at the very, very end
when you want to just validate
what your results were. So when
I do that split, what I don't want to happen is
I don't want to have, you know, all
of these sort of like outlying extreme
data points end up accidentally in the test
or the training set. So when I
use this function in TidyMiles called initial
validation split, it'll put
60% in the training set, 20%
in validation, and the remaining 20%
in testing. And what it'll do
is it'll do that three-way split
by
chopping this distribution up into
quartiles and doing the split
in each quartile of the data and then
recombining them together. So the
distribution of this outcome and
all three of those data sets should be very, very
similar to one another. So we can make sure
by doing that, we can make sure the distribution
here looks the same across the training
set, the test set, and the validation set.
So in the code
here, you know, we get to split about
6,000 data points for model fitting,
about 2,000 for validation,
and about 2,000 for testing.
We try to make our function
names as obvious as possible.
So if you have the
object that has the
information about the splitting, you want to get the training set
out, we're going to name that training for you.
And validation is the function
that brings back the validation set.
So, you know, this takes a split and you get
a data frame out of here with the appropriate
6,004 rows
and so on. Now a lot of
times I talk about resampling, like
cross-validation, the bootstrap, and those
are ways to use your training set
to get good estimates of performance that are not
overly optimistic. And I'm not going to
be doing cross-validation or resampling
or the bootstrap or
something like that. I'm going to use my validation set
sort of as like a single resample.
And to put that sort of into the tiny model format
the same way you would get
the same format as cross-validation,
do a little extra step here and take that split
object and pull out the validation
set in a way that we can consume
this by some of the functions
we'll use later.
So, you know, I think
I see this on one of the slides upcoming
is one of my college professors
said that the only way to be
comfortable with your data is to never look at it.
And so, you know, when you look
at this data a little bit, you look at
the time of the order, and clearly
the delivery time increases with that
and it's maybe not linear. So
this is something, if we're going to fit like a linear regression
here, we need to think about
that there's a non-linear effect here.
I use geomSmooth,
and what geomSmooth does under the hood is that
you use something called a spline function.
And what a spline does is it takes the original
time variable and sort of expands it
to these kind of weird extra
columns, and those extra columns
are the ones that are used in the linear regression.
So this smooth line
here that you see here is the prediction
from like a linear model that uses
maybe five or ten of these extra
non-linear terms based on the
order time.
That'll be relevant in a minute, so that's why I'm
lecturing on geomSmooth.
But this is something we need to think about if we're
going to fit like a linear model.
But if you look at it a little more closely, it's actually
a lot more complicated because it turns
out if you look at that
same trend and estimate
it differently for the day of the week the order was made,
it's quite different, that
Friday and Saturday have a very,
very steep non-linear curve, whereas
something like Monday is a lot more
blunted. So if we
just did this and put it in the model, we're going to
underfit because it actually
depends. And that's
what a statistical interaction is, is when you have
two predictors and their relationship
with the outcome, they depend on one another.
So in this case, just knowing the day of the week
is not enough, and it's also not
good enough to just do this non-linear function
of time. You have to sort of
consider them together, and so we'll do that in just a minute.
All right, so
we have this amazing patch code recipes,
and what it does is it prepares your data
for modeling. And you can start off
by just giving it any data set,
but we'll use the training set here.
And we'll use a formula, and all it
really does is, what the formula does
is it says, things on the left side
of the utility are outcomes
and everything else represented by
the dot is a predictor. So at this stage
all the recipe does is says, okay, what's the
role? Is it a predictor, is it an outcome?
And it looks at the actual columns, and it measures
like, are they category, are they
factor, or strings, or
ordered, or numeric, or integer. So it sort of
just investigates the data
and remembers what the
columns are. Now the way
recipes works is it's a little bit like
the formula method or model.matrix
in R, but with a flavor
of like dplyr. In dplyr, you would
keep piping in things that you want to do to the
data until you have it the way you want it.
And the recipe works the same way. We're going to
pipe in declarations
of like, hey, I want you to log the data
now, and I want you to do this with the data.
So the first thing we'll do
is we'll create indicator variables
for the day of the week
by using a function
called stepdummy. So those indicator variables
are sometimes called dummy variables.
So we're not mad at this variable.
It's just like stepdummy is the name of it.
And so all these things we're going to do and
pipe in, they're called step functions. They all
start with step under bar. And then
the first argument in all of them is
what variable should be affected by this.
And you can use any dplyr selector here like
you would with select. You could put in
like everything minus something
and starts with
or whatever you want. But at
this point, what you're saying is I want you to
take this column, make indicator
variables out of it, then take it out
and then leave the resulting indicators
in there. There's a lot
more you can do besides the dummy variables.
Take a look at this chapter in the
Tiny Models book. It's something
that we're very strong in for
this package. Oh, and one thing
is, don't you hate
what BaseR does? In this case, it would
say like order day and then just
take the level and just jam it up next to it.
It's like the worst aesthetically thing
ever. So what we do in StepDummy
is you get to choose the delimiter and by default
it's under bar. So
the resulting Friday indicator would be
order day under bar FRI.
So you have some control about how
it looks in your model results too.
Alright, remember that though, that it's going to
be named that.
What you could have done is recipes
have a bunch, like a lot
of extra selectors that you can just use
here. And you can choose variables not
only by their type, like are they character
or factor or things like that, you can also
choose them by their role. So if you want to
do something to all the predictors, whatever
might be in there, you can just say
all predictors instead of listing them all
out. And so there's
just a lot here that you can do with, and
it's kind of a strong
thing that we like about this because
generally speaking, there are some recipe steps
that will get rid of variables. So if
you start writing specific variables down, especially
late in the recipe, you may have
eliminated them and it might cause an error in the
recipe because you're saying, do this to variable x
but variable x isn't in the data anymore.
So we encourage people to use
very generic
selectors here.
Alright, so what's next?
We have a lot of
indicator variables, I think I
call them item, and there are counts.
But there might be one of those items in the
training set where it just
so happened they almost
never get ordered, and the training set
might have all zeros in it. That's not
a big deal for some models, but for other models
it doesn't like having a column of all zeros.
So we call that a zero variance predictor.
So what this would do is when you
use this recipe, it would look at your training set
it would find any of the predictors
I used all predictors, so
it would search those and look for anything that has
any column that has one
unique value, and it marks that as
you should get rid of that. And so this
is a little helpful thing you can do.
We also have something for what
we call near zero variance predictors.
Imagine you have like a thousand rows
and you have 999 zeros
in a single one, right?
That's maybe not what you want in your data set. So we have
some other ways of doing this that are a little more general.
Alright.
So then what we're going to do is
we're going to do splines. We're going to do
exactly what GM smooth does.
We're going to take our original column of
the hour that the order came in,
and we're going to generate as many columns
as we want to make it non-linear.
And if we add 100 columns
it's going to be a really wiggly line.
If we add very few columns, like 2 or 3,
it's going to be a relatively smooth line.
And so, you know, we don't know how many to add.
The typical
parameter for that is called the degrees of freedom
of the spline. And I'm just going to add
5 columns to represent that
non-linearly. Why 5?
I just picked it out of the air.
It's not, I mean, looking at this,
it's not like a super wiggly
point here, or a relationship.
5, I'd probably do fine.
But we have a variety
of other basis expansions. There's a lot
of different ways you can do splines. There's polynomial
expansions. So there's quite a lot of ways you
can represent a column
in a non-linear way to the model you're
going to use. But you might not, you might
be saying, like, I don't know about 5, though. I'm kind
of stuck on that. You don't have
to actually pick it.
You'll see later that you can actually tune these
options. So I can give it a
non-value of this
function called tune. And all that does
is it just marks it to say, like,
hey, later on, I don't, you're not going to be able to
do this recipe until you know what this is.
But we'll do it in a way that
we'll search over different values of that
parameter to figure out what the best performance is.
So you can mark pretty much
anything in here as being tunable
and then just optimize it
however you want to.
So, here we are.
We have, remember we have dummy
variables that are, like, order day
in the factor level. When
we make spline terms, the way they're going to
be named is they're going to be, like, order time
under bar 1, under bar
2, under bar, all the way up to 5.
So if you want to add interactions,
and I looked to see if you can do this in BaseR,
and you kind of can.
You can make interactions between a factor
and a spline expansion, but you can only do it
for one variable because it gives the
splines the same names if you did it with a second
variable. So we can
do it for one variable. We can do it for
pretty much everything, and the way we would
do that is something called step interact,
and then you can just give it whatever interactions
you want to, and those interactions could
use starts with or any dplyr selector.
So we know all our indicators start
with order day. We know our spline
terms start off with order time,
and that will let our spline
terms, those relationships
be different for day of the week,
which it looks like they are.
So this is something that would be a little bit
hard to do with BaseR, but
it's actually pretty simple to do it this way.
Alright, and then
the last thing we'll do is, just for kicks,
just to show that you can do it, is
there are some models like GlimNet or
k-nearest neighbors or something like that, where
if you don't, they're going
to want all the variables in the same units.
If you think
about computing a distance, if something
is in square meters
and another thing is in
low counts like 0, 1, 2, 3,
those aren't in the same units, and
the variable with the larger numbers
is going to dominate the computations.
So what StepNormalize does
is with your training set, it estimates
the mean and variance of every column,
and then when it goes to process
the data set with the recipe, it subtracts
the mean and divides by standard deviation,
so everything has a standard
normal distribution. And we're going to use GlimNet
in a minute, so, spoiler alert,
we need to do this for it.
Alright, so this is the things
we do to our data before we put it in the model,
and then how we make the model in TinyModels.
So what we do is
the package that does that
is called Parsnip. Parsnip
has different model functions.
So it's sort of almost like a two or three step
process here, is you say what model you want to use.
So the first thing you do is you say
I want to use linear regression.
And all that says is my outcome
is a number, and my predictor
should be like slopes and intercepts.
That's pretty much all it says. It doesn't say how you're
going to do the estimation, it doesn't say
what those values should be or what not.
There's different modeling
functions, so like
nearest neighbor model is very
equation-wise, like very different than linear
regression. There's model functions
for random forest, for decision trees,
there's a whole host of them for time series models
and so on. So step one
with TinyModels is tell me what you
want to do. Like what is it that you want
the end result to be? And then the second thing
you say is well how should I do it?
And the how that we do it is called
the engine. And so the default
engine for linear regression is LM, but I'm
going to show it here. You would just
pipe into that linear regression
function, set my engine to be LM.
And, you know, we could do that
but, you know, maybe not. We could
also use like TensorFlow.
So maybe you want to use some sort of weird objective function
through TensorFlow where you have a lot of data and you want
to batch it. You can do that too.
Or if you're more of a torch person, we have a
torch modeling package called Brule.
You could do that. If you have
a lot of data, maybe you want to use Spark.
You might have your data in a Spark cluster.
So you can fit that model using Spark.
If you're like me
and you're really into Bayesian models,
you can fit a linear regression
using Stan. So that's not doing maximum
likelihood, it's doing like Bayesian
estimation using priors and all that
stuff. The thing we're
going to use is GlimNet. And GlimNet's a really
nice model. The package will be a little
bit frustrating, but it's an excellent model
that can handle a lot of different things.
It automatically does feature selection for you
and has a lot of niceties to it.
So we've set our engine.
We're ready to go.
It does have some tuning parameters.
And these tuning parameters are things that you need to set
up front. You can't directly
estimate them like you estimate slopes and intercepts.
You have to say up front what they should be. Sort of like
the degrees of freedom. It's something that matters
a lot, but there's no equation that tells you what
the value should be. And the first one there
is called the penalty. So GlimNet
is a regularization method. It penalizes
your coefficients. And so
usually that penalty is between 0 and, I don't know, like
1. So I'm going to just pick
.1 here just to show it to you.
And then GlimNet can also penalize
in two different ways. It can do something called ridge regression.
And it can also do something called
lasso regression. Or it can do some
mixture of the two of them. And so
by saying mixture equal .5 here,
I'm going to say give me a 50-50 mix
of the ridge penalty
and a 50-50 mix of the lasso penalty.
And so these are just things that
you would have to figure out which one worked better
and which ones don't.
And also if you've ever used GlimNet or
seen it, we're avoiding
a lot of jargon here. Because in GlimNet
they call these lambda and alpha.
And so unless you're like
reading up on the statistical literature
in the original papers, like the help
file tells you that. But if you look at the function
definition and it's lambda, it's like, what is
that? So we try to, as much as
possible, avoid jargon. Whether that's
a Greek letter or something
that's just really specific to that package.
We try to keep all the names the same
of arguments and try to avoid
sort of like things that maybe people wouldn't
know what they are by looking at them.
Alright. So we know
what we want to do and how we want to do it.
So let's actually do it. Now we
have a recipe that's going to
process our data and give it in a format
that we want to GlimNet. And so we
can do that in like a couple steps.
But the best and probably most straightforward
thing you can do is combine them together
in something called a workflow.
And if you've ever seen like a Scikit-learn pipeline,
it's basically the same thing. We're basically
binding a preprocessor, which is
the recipe, to a model and use
them as one unit. So by
adding the model and adding the workflow
or adding the recipe into this workflow,
I can do everything with this one object.
So if I want to fit my training set
to fit my model to the
training set, if you just
use this with the workflow,
it processes the recipe the way it's supposed
to. It knows what the predictors
are. It knows what the outcome is. It knows how to hand
it off to the modeling function. And then
the modeling function knows, oh yeah,
GlimNet needs a matrix, so we're going to make
sure we give it a matrix and does all the things
that GlimNet needs. And then
just as easily, the predict method is
one simple step.
We're just predicting the first five rows
of the validation set here. And you can
see it comes back as a table.
Most modeling functions will give you back
a vector unless you're doing multivariate,
in which case it's probably a matrix, or if you're
doing classifications, sometimes it's a vector,
but sometimes it's a matrix if you're getting probabilities.
And the point I'm getting at here
is we want everything in data frames,
even if it's a data frame with a single row.
Because you can very easily just
bind calls this to your
original data. You can
do a lot more with a data frame
if you're into the tidyverse,
than you have getting output out. You don't know
if it's going to be a vector or a matrix or a data frame.
So we always do everything with
data frames, and the naming of these things is
very consistent. So you'll always know the
names of what you get out.
Now, what I can do now is if
I want to see if this model works well in the validation
set, I can predict the entire validation
set, C-bind that
to my original data where the outcome is,
and then I can look at one of the
tiny models functions that computes the root
mean squared error, and do all that.
But we don't want you to have to worry about that.
We have a function, a suite
of functions that do that.
So using validation is like a single
resample. So the code that you see here
is the same code that you would use if you're using
cross-validation or time series resampling.
What you do is, basically,
it's called fit resample. So we have a single
one, and you just give it your
resampling object, which we defined
early on, and the workflow.
And then it'll just
fit, whether it's 10 models for
10-fold cross-validation, it's just one
for this validation set. It'll do that
for every tuning parameter
value you have. We only have one right now.
And then get the predictions
and the right data, compute the
performance metrics, and give those back to you.
So by running these three lines
of code, you get an object back,
and if you want to get the performance metrics
out of it, you can see here the
two that come back automatically. The root
mean squared here is about 2.3
minutes, and the R squared is about 88%,
which is not bad, right? You might be like,
wow, that's pretty good, right?
But as I said,
the only way to be comfortable with your data is to never
look at it. So we've also
developed a bunch of calibration
and diagnostic functions for a lot
of models in this package called probably.
So if I load the probably
package, there's a function called
calplot
regression. There's a bunch of calplot
methods, and that just does the
observe versus predicted, and
keeps the axes the
same, and
aspect ratio of one die,
and then it puts a little smoother on
there, and you can see that actually the fits are
pretty good, unless you're
really going to take more than 40 minutes, and then we're
really, really under predicting the data.
So that R squared of 88% might look
pretty great, but maybe not
once you look at this. So you might want
to add some more features, and you might try a
different model to figure out how you can
do better on this.
But the statistics don't always tell the entire
story.
So what about parameters? I keep talking about tuning
parameters. So at this point, I might say,
well, maybe I need 10 degrees of freedom for the spline,
or maybe I should use a lower penalty or mixture.
At this point, what you can do is you can
mark all those things for tuning, and
then use our tuning machinery to
optimize those values
to get the lowest root mean
squared error. And we're going to do that, but we're
going to actually talk about a different model really quick.
I'm kind of running late, so I'm going to
go through this a little bit. There's this amazing
model that not many people know about called Cubist,
and it's been around for quite a long time,
and it's a little bit like a
boosted tree ensemble. What it
initially does is it creates a regression
tree. In this case, I've made a really short
regression tree on this data set. You can see
there's four terminal nodes. And what
a rule is, is it's a distinct path
through this tree. So this is
a model with four rules in it.
So what Cubist does is it gets these initial
rules, and then with each one of these
data sets at the end, it fits a linear regression
to it. So now I have four
linear regressions from my model.
And then, like boosting, it builds a sequence
of these models together, where
at the end of this ensembling process, you
might have 100 rules.
And you go to make a prediction. That prediction might
only matter to like 20 of the rules.
It gets their linear regression predictions
and then it averages them. And it's a very, very
effective model. And if you were wondering
what these rules look like, in this particular case,
here's a rule where the order time is
less than about 14 minutes,
and if it was on a Friday or Saturday
and it was within, let's say, five miles,
then you should predict it using
this model. Or if I had
a longer running order,
or, I'm sorry, it was later
in the afternoon on a Saturday,
you know, I think you should use this model
to predict. So in Cubist, you get
like maybe, you know, a subset
of the total rules for every prediction.
It makes a bunch of linear regression predictions
and then it averages them together. And that tends
to work pretty good. But we don't know how many
things we should be averaging. We don't know if we should
just do a little or do a lot.
And so what we're going to do is tune that.
So that model is available
in one of our packages called Rules, that has a bunch
of rule-based models. It's called Cubist
Rules. And then the variable
that is the ensemble size is called
Committees. So I'll mark that for tuning.
You know, Cubist is easy.
You don't have to do any indicator variables. You don't have to do
any transformations. You don't have to, I think
it deals with missing values.
So I'm just going to give it, instead of a recipe,
I'm going to have my workflow take a formula
and then
go on my way. So I'm not going to tell
it how many committees to use. I'm going to say
I want 25 of them, and you just pick
ones based on everything you know about this
variable, this tuning parameter.
So instead of fitResamples, I'm
going to use gridSearch, but the code is
almost identical to what we did before.
And it's going to use that validation set
and training set. It's going
to do this for 25 different values of
committees, measure performance using the
training set, and give you the metrics back.
And when it does that, it looks like,
looking at it, it's like, oh, it wants a lot of
rules here, and the
RMSE is,
you know, I'd probably say substantially lower,
not massively lower, but it's an improvement
on the linear regression model.
I can auto-plot that
and see what that trend is. Well, it turns
out that we don't actually need this many.
We could probably do with like 10 or 12
and get a simpler model and probably get
about the same level of performance.
So then, you know, so now I think I
know what kind of qubis model I like.
You know, if you plot this, the data
points, you can see, oh, yeah, I like this better,
what not. Spoiler alert, this is a better model.
And then we have
other machinery that I'm not going to go into too much
where you can finalize that model, say,
oh, give me a qubis model with, you know,
10 committees,
and then we have a nice function called
last fit that it'll take that
initial fit, it'll
run the model on
your entire training set, fit the testing set,
and give you the plot, the data for
plotting the metrics in one easy step.
So that's like the gist
of what TinyModels does.
I'm just trying to give you a flavor of like what the interface
looks like and the ways we think about this.
If you're just doing something super simple
like, you know, empty
cars, you know, you might just stick to
LM and nobody here is going to be offended by that.
It's not for like I need something
really complicated, but there are oftentimes
there's things you want to do that are just kind of a pain
in doing them in base R or in the
packages, so it's really designed to help with that a lot.
So
there's just some links here to things in the
TinyModels book. I only have like
two minutes.
The things that we've done recently is
hopefully before the end of the year we'll release
all of the packages that have the
integrated survival analysis, so
you can do everything we just talked about
using like proportional hazards models or
tree-based models for sensor data and so
on. We spent a lot
of time, it turns out
case weights are really complicated
and nobody really knew that
so we enabled that
in a lot of places for TinyModels and
I just spent a lot of time decoding
what these things are called conformal
inference tools, so
those are in probably. The things we're
working on right now is model
fairness metrics and ways to build
your models to sort of mitigate any
fairness issues.
If anybody here does causal inference, we have some sort
of prototype causal inference tools
so if you're interested, let us know. We'd love to get
you to look at those. And then
one thing we want to do is post-processing.
If you want to calibrate your
model or optimize
the probability threshold to
say whether something's an event or not
we have a list of things that we
want to allow you to do or even
optimize that come
after the model fits. We have pre-processing
the model, now we have a limited number
of post-processing tools that we want to do.
And then
of course the most important thing, thank you
for the invitation to speak.
Everybody today was sharing their
mate with me. It was very nice.
Word got around, I was like, take mine.
And especially thanks to the group.
They do amazing work
including all the people who used to be in the group or
have been interns or helped out.
It's been a huge team project
and I really appreciate it.
Thanks.
Questions?
Thank you for your
presentation.
TidyMod is really
big and I would like to know
how, because in the process
to do and compare
models you are doing a lot of
steps and
you have different randomness
in some points and different
the models also have some randomness
inside and how you are
thinking in the reproducibility
when you are comparing
different models that have different
levels of reproducibility
there. I know that you have something
saying about
here we have a problem
about reproducibility but I don't
remember where.
So the effect
of randomness on the models
the first thing I would say is
that will come out in resampling.
So if you fit the model once and you don't know
and the model uses random numbers
was that a good set of random numbers?
You can get the effect of random numbers
by doing cross-validation so that will
measure the effect of it.
The usage of it is
we have inherited a lot of
things that I really
haven't dealt with in Carrot.
I came in with a whole list of okay we know what not to do
a few things.
For a while we had to figure out how
when you are running in parallel to make sure you set
the seeds inside the parallel
workers to make sure those get set right.
I have to say that with
one or two exceptions everything is locked up
pretty tight.
If you set the seed
before you do model tuning or something
in 99% of the cases
there is no issues with
well the
problem is like I said
R often farms a lot
out to other computing languages
and the one
I will tell you about one that
is well known is
if you are doing a support vector machine
the main package that we use for that uses
a C library called
LiveSVM
and it turns out that
I am not sure why, Crayon usually
frowns on this, I am surprised this is a thing
but it has its own random number
generator in there. So if you are fitting
a classification model
especially if it is one that has
really low event priorities
or event prevalences
if you run that model twice
you are always going to get different answers
but you get noticeably different answers in some cases.
So that is something external to us
and I have over the years emailed the maintainer
and they are like we did not write that library.
But the other
thing that we realized is
with deep learning we are trying to do a lot
leverage a lot of what comes with
TensorFlow and Torch
they do a lot on the GPU
and I am getting the idea that it is really
hard to set seeds in a GPU
because none of them do it.
So we try
to lock that down as much as possible
in the R packages
talking to the people who manage those
there were ways to set
it by setting system environmental
variables but they have over
the years given us ways to set that
so we have done as best as we can
but chances are if you are using
a GPU you cannot
really guarantee that that
is going to happen. But I think for the most
part it is pretty solid in terms of reproducibility.
Anyone has
more questions?
You mentioned that
one of the possibilities when
setting the engine was using
Spark as an engine
I would like to know
how transparent is the transition
for the user when using a
vanilla engine, let's say Random Forest
the more traditional implementation
if I want to switch to Spark
how much modification
of my code do I have to do
or is more transparent
like just switching the engine?
I've got good news and
bad news. Which one would you like
first? Bad news.
Right now
in setting models you can only just fit
like with Parsnip a model
with Spark. You can't tune them or resample
them. And the reason
for that is Spark DataFrames
are really good at what they do but they are kind of
hard to program against. So for example
Spark DataFrame doesn't really have
a way to tell you how many rows are in it
because you would have to evaluate it to know
and in some cases we need to know what that is.
And so
I think
if you're using Spark, is there anybody
else here that uses Spark a lot?
Okay. So if it's
of interest to you, what I would suggest you do
is you go into Parsnip and put in
issues about the TinyModels
package
or something like one of our
repos and say
we need more
comprehensive Spark support. So the bad news
is you can't do a lot with
Spark and TinyModels. The good news is it's really easy
to know when that
transition happens because there's no transition.
So there's somebody who works
with us a lot named Edgar Ruiz
and he's like the Spark genius. He probably knows more
about Spark than most people on the planet
and I think he has
grand designs for how
you could make Spark work in almost everywhere
in TinyModels. The problem
is
that complexity, we don't know how many people
we don't know what the denominator is
or we don't know what the numerator is. We know how many people
roughly use Spark but we don't know how many
people out of that want this
and it would be quite a lot of work especially for
him and we don't know if it's
something we can do. So if
there are people out there that would like something like that
you need to be vocal about it to us.
Yes.
Can I give you feedback about
that topic?
In my organization
I think
that chicken and egg problem
that idea would be more
developed. Like being able
to code a model
with a single implementation
and then porting it to Spark
it would be like a killer application
for many organizations
because even for people to use Python
it might be rare.
Coding in Stack Overflow is very easy
but the transitioning, the recoding
of the Stack Overflow model to Spark
it's more complicated
so that kind of portability
would be very important
I didn't know it was
possible until you mentioned it
now.
There's some limitations though
so for example
let's say you're doing
you need to impute data
like you have missing data and you need to build an
imputation model into your preprocessor
to predict the missing values
like if you're doing
if you're doing nearest neighbor
imputation now you've got to save the entire
set at that point in the recipe
so there's things that I'm not
sure they're even feasible to do
even if we try in Spark
so if we end up having more
substantial Spark support
we don't know how to do this quite yet in documentation
we're going to need to tell you
when you can use this and when you can't
we can have the function tell you
when you execute it but we need
to figure out where that boundary is
and how to document that boundary so that
you're not frustrated like you see there's a
step to do something and it turns out
it doesn't do it and it gives you an error
we're not really sure how to organize
that
we have this problem with data.table
we have the same thing with
arrow like in
some cases outside
of the Spark modeling functions all that has
to be converted to a data set at some
point or a data frame at some point to use
in standard R libraries
so this issue of the data storage versus
the training set in the
model is a really tough one
but I know we can do a lot more
with Spark. We have another
question here
Thanks
Max
one thing that I really like about the
recipes part is
generalized additive
models, GAMS
I found that really hard to teach
GAMS but now I find
it easy because I say
this is actually what it's doing
you put the smoothers in the
or the splines in the recipes
and then you can actually
inspect them
when you get your model results as well
but the thing that I
struggle with with recipes
is a lack of
feedback on what's happening at
every step and
a lot of these things are really vital
and can be critically
damaging to your data prior
it's a little bit black boxy
I'd like to have more diagnostics
come out from each step
I used
a recipe in a workflow
and I said fit and predict
and all that stuff just happened which is
opaque. If you're using
a recipe directly, the function
that estimates the recipe has like a logging
it does have a logging process
that you can trigger and it'll tell you
especially it'll tell you like this many
variables went in, this many came out
I eliminated these
we should definitely try to
add that option during
resampling and fitting
so we would just need a way
I mean we have a mechanism
we'd have to add that
potential for that flag to go through to the
actual recipe execution
you're not the first person to say that
so yeah that's
something that we could definitely do
I'm pretty sure we can do that
I mean it can be done
but it just depends on how
much Emil is going to regret it
yeah
so we have time for one last question
Hi
in the documentation
in the parsnip fine models
later
or a few months
a year ago
there is one
option for
a model
in linear regression
in one page
we saw all the
engines
now
each engine
I think
users that don't know
what engine
do that
need
one extra page
so when
I want
to use
a new model
I go
to find parsnip
I see
several pages so I don't know
what to do
I think there was
useful one page that
this engine is for that
when you want
to do that
congratulations
very nice package
we are your fans
thank you
do you want more information on
a description
of how the model works, like the math of the model
or how to use the code
what more would you like to know in that instance
for example
sometimes there is
in linear regression
there are various engines
what engine
I have to
choose
in what
thing I decide
what engine to use
if I don't know what to do
in each package
so
a page
in that
more guidelines
I personally hope in the next
coming year I will be writing
a lot more public
web documentation on how
these models work
before that
happens
he comes out to the tiny models
and I'll just pick this one
it's the first one
you can search here for the type of model we used
actually I'll look for cubist
so cubist, it tells you what
package it is, what the engine name is
there is a little link here
it takes you out to what we call
the engine documentation
so did you get here?
yeah
one step before
we saw
several slides
we need to do
several pages
and more information
so you need something before this to source
DRU
ok
Hannah's got an idea
can you show
the parsnet reference page
that's this?
no
do you mean like the linear reg one?
yes, just for the model definition
right
because it lists the engines
let me open R and do that
you can just go to
parsnet.tinymodels.org
this is what I live with
this is what he pays me for
that's right, I pay for this
oh my god
let's talk about linear regression
I'm going to blow this up
if I do linear reg
so if you're not at the website
if you're in R
here's the main page
that lists all the
myriad
I didn't know it was that many
for linear reg
one nice thing is it tells you what packages
this requires an extension package
this is the page you were looking for?
Hannah?
yeah
it still exists on the parsnet page
it does
so if you're in parsnet and you click on reference
it lists you to model definitions
and then if you click on linear regression
you get to that on the package downside
as well
we could fake that table out and say
make an artificial all engines and have it just link to this
we will
try to put many ways
to the right thing
we should just do it now
let's make a pull request
no we're not
that's really good feedback
if I
a newbie
in modeling
I saw
linear reg
and there is many giants
as a real user
we know which engine
choose
a newbie know
I think it's confusing
more than
too much
length
one other thing I'll show you that might help in the future is
I'm going to go to the tinymodels book
to the website for the tinymodels book
and in there
we have a nice table
it's like an appendix
that if you're going to fit one of these models
you might be wondering
do I need to center and scale
do I need to impute
and so we have a table here that gives you the list
and says yeah you should
definitely need to create indicator variables for this
and definitely need to maybe normalize
some things
it's not a model thing but it's like
even before you get to the model
you'll kind of need to know this
and it's not obvious sometimes
we put some of that in the engine documentation
thank you very much Max
well
ok
exciting moments are coming
from the end
thank you very much for putting up
all this time
it was a pleasure, right?
a pleasure
it was
for me, I always have the feeling
that I want a little more
now I'm a little tired
it was good to have you here
to have all the guests
thank you very much for coming
for participating
for continuing to build the community
a lot of nice things happened
a lot of people came
Diane came, Max came, Hannah came
people from Appsilon came
who gave courses
Riva came, who also gave a course
we learned
and we enjoyed the presence of people
who come from far away, who have a lot of experience
that is also very good
we took our photo of our ladies
there we are several times
because there were people who did not come
and well, we had our moment of stickers
which is a very stressful moment
for people
I saw them fighting and jumping
like crazy
well and also
some difficult moments
but it's really good
to see
the friends
and spend time together
obviously this requires
a lot of effort and a lot of work
and basically
with little budget
it requires a lot more work
so I love
to see them, to work with them
it's been years since we've been working on this
and trying to build the R community
in Latin America and I think we're doing
pretty well
I put on a suit
we put on a suit
the maximum
I think it's a 7
a 7
well, we're going to lower the note a little
well
if you wonder where I was
in the photo that they are crying
I was on the beach with my children, enjoying
I was the most
well
as we always say
we're talking about community
and that's done with all the people
who contribute their work
their time, their ideas, their energy
to do this
so thank you very much again
to this year's organizing committee
Nacho, Ignacio Álvarez Castro
Mauro Loprete, Andrea Gómez Varga
Beatriz Mirs, Juan Pablo Ruiz Nicolini
El Tucu, Macarena Quiroga
Jessica Formoso, María Nanton
Roberto Villegas Díaz, Luis Pao
Elio, Patricia
Fabricio, Estefany y Bruna
also thank you very much to the scientific committee
that helps us to review
all the proposals you send
and decide how
we are going to present, in what format
thank you very much to Sara, Marcela, Ignacio
Virginia, Zulema, Naim
Elio, Jocelyn, Marina
Cristina, Paola, Juan Cruz
Andrés, Felipe, Alejandro, Denis
María, Adriana, Carolina
Juan José, Jennifer, Juan, Leonardo
Ricardo, Estefany, Francisca
Felipe, Vilma, Germán, Gabriela, Alejandra
Inés y Luis
Un aplauso para todos ellos
Para todos los que están acá y se están preguntando
qué cool sería participar, sí
son todos bienvenidos
muchas gracias a nuestros sponsors
a la facultad, al Instituto de Estadística
de la Universidad de la República de Uruguay
al Art Consortium, a Absilon
a Chicada y a nuestras comunidades
amigas ArtLadies y ArtOpenSci
y muchísimas gracias
al equipo local de la facultad
Laura, equipo de registro
equipo de informática, electrotecnia
comunicaciones, vigilancia y adecanato
gracias totales
Hablar del futuro
a mediano plazo, a largo plazo y a corto plazo
A mediano plazo
qué sigue
después de una conferencia uno sale con mucho entusiasmo
con ganas de hacer cosas
y conocimos a muchas personas en estos días
y la idea es mantenerse en contacto
quienes no lo han hecho aún, únanse al Slack
de LatinR
entre las conferencias se mantiene muy activo
la gente comparte proyectos
comparte dudas
recursos, o sea, un espacio que se mantiene
activo, no solo existe durante la época
de la conferencia
La comunidad R en general ha sido muy activa
en redes sociales, ese también es un espacio
para mantenerse en contacto con las personas
que conocieron hoy día
y también están los Meetup locales
de ArtLadies, de los grupos de usuarios
de R
muchos de ellos estuvieron medios inactivos
durante la pandemia, espero que para muchos
este sea el entusiasmo para partir
¿Dónde está Claudia?
Ya estamos como
viendo que la gente empieza a organizar eventos
¿Qué va a pasar en 2024?
En 2024
vamos a hacer la conferencia en línea
hay varias razones para esto
la última vez que la hicimos
presencial fue en Chile, el año 2019
y ese año una persona
de academia por inscribirse
a la conferencia y a dos tutoriales
pagó alrededor de 220 dólares
este año una persona que se inscribía
de academia
pagó 20 dólares por
la conferencia y pagó 15 dólares
por cada tutorial, o sea el precio es mucho menor
y eso es posible porque estuvimos
varios años haciendo conferencias en línea
que nos permitían juntar presupuesto para hacer
la conferencia accesible
este año por primera vez pudimos hacer
que todas las presentaciones
el presentador o presentadora principal
no pagara el ticket de la conferencia
es importante, obviamente nos encantaría
organizar la conferencia presencial todos los años
pero
este costo
tendríamos que traspasarlo a los tickets
para que la gente se registre y eso lo que hace
es convertir la conferencia en algo inaccesible
sabemos que existen muchas conferencias
que tienen precios que son el sueldo mínimo
de nuestros países y eso es inviable
entonces queremos también mantener
hacer que la conferencia sea accesible
y la idea va a ser ir intercalando versiones en línea
con versiones presenciales para
poder mantener los costos
de una manera que sea viable
para que las personas puedan participar
¿qué significa? que el 2024
nos vamos a volver a reunir
pero no nos vamos a volver a reunir de manera virtual
y eso también le da la oportunidad a personas que no pueden viajar
porque cumplen labores de cuidado
porque tienen trabajos que no les permiten viajar
o por presupuesto puedan también participar
de esta comunidad
entonces esa es una decisión importante
a largo plazo
respecto de lo que va a pasar el año 2025
que va a volver a ser presencial
queremos escuchar
propuestas de a quienes les interesaría
ser la sede de la edición
de la edición 2025
sabemos que ya hay varias personas en distintos países que tienen interés
vamos a dejar un formulario
en el Slack de LatinR
y en la página web de LatinR
para conocer su interés respecto de
ofrecer su ciudad
para que llevemos la conferencia a ese lugar
y en dos años más nos volvamos a encontrar
de manera presencial
y a corto plazo
el sorteo
ya tenemos varias cosas para sortear
todo el mundo estaba preguntando
por los stickers del Tinyverse
y solo habían dos
esos dos
así que los vamos a sortear
para que se ajuste a la distribución
tenemos algunas
dependiendo de su país
remera, polera, sudadera
que vamos a sortear también
y lo que todo el mundo estaba esperando
la segunda edición del libro Art Packages
autografiada por ambos autores
Jenny Bryan que fue keynote speaker en LatinR
el 2018
y David Wickham que fue keynote speaker en LatinR
el 2019
así que vamos a hacer el sorteo
con R
tiene que estar acá
así que me voy a mover
hacia el otro lado
redoble de tambores
ya vamos
se van los stickers Natalia
la función sortear
nos borramos
Joaquín Ferreira
¿está acá?
al agua
¿no dicen al agua?
en Chile decimos al agua
María Fernanda González
al agua
el otro sticker
Roberto Aguirre
¿al agua?
Victoria Landaberry
bueno, tenía efectos de sonido
pero no sonó
así que no importa
Valentina Cortés
Carolina Musso se fue
Lucía
¿está Fernaberry?
Mauro Lepore
Emilio Aguirre
Daniel Araujo
Bruno
¿está por ahí?
Bruno Tancred
Oscar Montañez
Mayara Andrade
Negli Gallardo
¿está aquí?
Giovanni Reales
Giovanni está
llegó justo para el sorteo
eso es timing
Noelia Castellano
se fue
Bernadette
y ahora Redomble de Tambores
¿quién será?
¿quién es?
Santiago Nicoleta
¿no está?
Federico Rodríguez
Valentín Romanelli
¿sí? ¿es él?
¿sí?
bueno, muchas gracias
y nos vemos virtualmente el 2024
y en algún lugar de Latinoamérica
el 2025
Subtítulos realizados por la comunidad de Amara.org